Problem Statement



After preparing the employee dataset through encoding categorical variables and splitting into training and testing sets, the next crucial step is to build a machine learning model that can predict employee attrition. The HR analytics team needs a classification model that can learn patterns from historical employee data and predict whether new employees are likely to leave the company.



For this task, the team will use the Naïve Bayes Classifier, specifically the Gaussian Naïve Bayes variant, which is well-suited for classification problems with continuous numeric features. This probabilistic classifier assumes that features are independent and follow a Gaussian (normal) distribution.



The team needs to accomplish two key modeling tasks:



1.Train a Naïve Bayes Classifier – Build and train a Gaussian Naïve Bayes model using the training dataset:



First, prepare the data by converting categorical variables (Department and salary) into numeric dummy variables.
Remove the original categorical columns to ensure all features are numeric.
Split the data into training (70%) and testing (30%) sets.
Initialize a GaussianNB classifier and train it on the training features (X_train) and target labels (y_train).
Display the trained model object showing its parameters.


2. Predict outcomes for test data – Use the trained model to make predictions:



Apply the trained classifier to the test features (X_test).
Generate predictions indicating whether each employee in the test set is likely to leave (1) or stay (0).
Display the complete array of predictions for all test samples.


This process creates a predictive model that can be used to identify employees at risk of leaving, enabling proactive retention strategies.



CSV File Structure



﻿



Sample Data



satisfaction_level,last_evaluation,number_project,average_montly_hours,time_spend_company,Work_accident,left,promotion_last_5years,Department,salary

0.38,0.53,2,157,3,0,1,0,sales,low

0.8,0.86,5,262,6,0,1,0,sales,medium

0.11,0.88,7,272,4,0,1,0,sales,medium

0.72,0.87,5,223,5,0,1,0,sales,low

0.37,0.52,2,159,3,0,1,0,sales,low

Input format :
CSV File Input:

The program prompts the user to enter the name of the CSV file containing employee data.
Input must include the file extension .csv.
Output format :
The program generates two outputs in sequence:



1. Trained Naïve Bayes model object:



Displays the GaussianNB classifier object with its default parameters.
Standard format: GaussianNB(priors=None, var_smoothing=1e-09)
This shows the trained model is ready with default hyperparameters:
priors=None: Class prior probabilities are learned from training data.
var_smoothing=1e-09: Smoothing parameter to prevent zero variance issues.
Followed by a blank line.


2. Predictions for test data:



Displays a NumPy array containing predictions for all test samples.
Format: [prediction1 prediction2 prediction3 ...]
Each prediction is either:
1: Employee is predicted to leave
0: Employee is predicted to stay
Array length equals the number of samples in the test set (approximately 30% of total dataset).
Predictions are integer values (0 or 1).


Refer to the sample output for exact formatting specifications.

Code constraints :
CSV File Constraints



File must be a valid comma-separated CSV file with .csv extension.
File must exist in the same directory as the Python script.
File must contain a header row with exact column names (case-sensitive).
All expected columns must be present: satisfaction_level, last_evaluation, number_project, average_montly_hours, time_spend_company, Work_accident, left, promotion_last_5years, Department, salary
The Department and salary columns must contain valid string values for encoding.
The left column must contain binary values (0 or 1) as the target variable.


Column Data Constraints



satisfaction_level, last_evaluation: Float values (typically 0.0 to 1.0).
number_project, average_montly_hours, time_spend_company: Integer values representing counts or hours.
Work_accident, left, promotion_last_5years: Binary integer values (0 or 1).
Department: Non-empty string values. Common values: sales, technical, support, IT, hr, accounting, management, marketing, RandD, product_mng.
salary: Non-empty string values. Must be one of: low, medium, high.
No missing values should be present in any column for proper model training.


Program Constraints



The program uses pandas for data manipulation, scikit-learn for modeling and splitting.
If the CSV file is not found, the program prints: "Error: File '{filename}' not found." and exits.


Data Preprocessing Requirements



The dataset contains categorical columns (Department and salary) which must be converted into numerical form before model training.
After encoding, only numeric feature columns should remain.
The target variable is the left column.


Train–Test Split Requirements



The data must be divided into training and testing sets.
Training set size should be 70%, testing set size 30%.


Model Training Requirements



A Gaussian Naïve Bayes classifier must be created and trained using the training data.
Default model parameters should be used.
The trained model object must be printed exactly as generated by scikit-learn.


Prediction Requirements



Predictions must be generated for all test samples using the trained model.
Output should be a NumPy array of 0s and 1s (stay/leave).
The array must be printed in its raw format.


Output Formatting:



Model object is printed directly (shows class name and parameters).
Predictions are printed as a NumPy array without additional formatting.
One blank line separates the two outputs.
Sample test cases :
Input 1 :
Sample.csv
Output 1 :
GaussianNB(priors=None, var_smoothing=1e-09)

[1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1]